hey everyone uh welcome to python bytes um you know let's get it started uh michael just got
back from vacation yay um and uh slightly different time but we'll probably get back to
a regularish time next week hello and welcome to python bytes where we deliver python news and
headlines directly to your earbuds this is episode 457 and it's being recorded on november
11th 2025 and i'm brian aukin and i am michael kennedy wow nowhere oh it's it's uh 11 11 it's
corduroy day i totally forgot to wear corduroy's today but i love it is that because the vertical
stripes yeah yeah yeah i love it i have no no corduroy on either we we've missed the
missed the opportunity some stripes on your it's not corduroy but yeah your sweater yeah almost
the sweater almost pulled it off uh anyway um we'll we'd like to thank everybody that's that
supports us through going to uh doing talk python training or the py test course patreon supporters
or people that bought our books uh we really really appreciate all the support and it keeps us going
um also love to hear from people on blue sky on mastodon and through email so um you can go to the
Contact us on pythonbytes.fm.
And there's the links to all the Bluesky Mastery
and all those things to get all of us.
We actually have a couple items today from listeners,
so feel free to send us things.
If you'd like to join the show live,
and even if it's on a weird time like this week,
you can find out when it's going to happen next
by going to pythonbytes.fm/live
and jump on and talk with us while we're recording.
It's fun.
Also, you don't need to take notes
because we're going to send you all the links.
Well, they're in the show notes,
but we'll also send them directly to your inbox
if you sign up to be a friend of the show
and go to pythonbytes.fm and sign up for the newsletter.
I think that's all of the stuff.
So let's jump into the first item, Michael.
So let's talk about it now.
Get on the screen for you.
I want to talk about something called HTTP tap at http tap.dev.
Now, this one, it's a little bit like HTTP pi.
HTTP pi?
I don't know how you really pronounce that correctly,
which is my go-to anytime I need to test something on the terminal
or that sort of thing.
HTTP pi is.
Because it's like curl or whatever, but it gives you lots more stats, gives you more information.
And this is a little bit like that.
If you wanted to go into, say, your Chrome DevTools or something and say, I'm requesting this page or this URL or this API endpoint.
It's a little bit slow.
It's a little bit funky.
What's going on?
Where's the problem?
If it's getting hung up, is it connecting to the server or is it the backend app server, like Grinny and whoever?
where it's not responding.
So that's what this is all about.
And I believe it's built with Rich or Textual.
I can't remember how far down the Wilma Guggen train it goes.
But it definitely is built on some of those.
Built with Python, though that's not necessarily that important.
Because I guess it's easier to make improvements to.
But it's more just a tool that anyone doing web stuff with Python
might be interested in.
And I pulled up a little example of just asking
talkpython, acptap, then talkpython.fm.
And it says, here's the analysis.
And apparently there's only one step,
maybe if there were redirects or something.
It would show multi-stage flows,
but there's no redirects, so there's not.
Shows you the IP address, the TLS version, the cipher,
when the certificate expires, the status, the size,
the server, gets all of that stuff right,
which is pretty cool.
hmm then it has this waterfall tiered sort of diagram says the request timeline it took 29
milliseconds for dns to figure out where the heck that was because i've been on vacation i've been
going to the website so had to go get it from the internet and then it took 80 milliseconds to
connect to the server by the way it's about 80 milliseconds ping time so you got to keep that
in mind when all these numbers right like that's East Coast West Coast the US
2500 miles so connect eight 80 milliseconds TLS took 130 milliseconds so
if you know if you ever see your browser doing like keep alive type of stuff you
know that's a big savings right there it's almost 200 milliseconds savings if
it doesn't have to keep doing that over and over right so that's pretty nice and
then you can see it's actually sending the requests and waiting for the
response. So goes out, comes back, takes 170 milliseconds. Again, ping time in there as well.
And then the transfer is a whopping 4.3 milliseconds. So this is pretty cool. A really
quick view of just seeing what's going on, right, Brian? Yeah, that's actually, I love that.
Very useful, especially if you've got some lag issues or some part of your website that's a
little slow, you can look at what's going on.
Is it DNS? Is it the transfer?
Where's this delay coming from? I mean, it's not a super fine grain, but this is pretty good.
Yeah, for sure. And there's a lot of stuff involved, right?
Like you said, the DNS might be taking forever, which could be
part of the problem, or who knows, right? There's just a lot of things.
So really neat to see
this little UI built in Python.
yeah and i guess we have to say it it's always dns it's always dns i mean that's
it's not always dns but yeah anyway yeah but it often often no i i think this is great this is
cool well um i've got um actually some side projects that i've got some uh some weird
speed issues and i don't know why and um even just like looking at some of the stuff
help out to figure out where to start debugging.
Yeah, you can get some of these types of things in the dev tools and browsers, but this is
really nice.
It's visual.
It's colorful.
It's graphical.
I love it.
I like it.
And it's command line.
Yay, we love command line.
Yay.
Okay.
I have to admit, I click on listicles all the time, but we don't cover very many listicles
on the show, but I'm going to cover one today.
I actually
Oh my aspect ratio is off
There we go
Here we go
This is from PyCharm
It's actually from
Evgenia Verbena
That's a cool name
10 smart performance hacks
For faster Python code
And
There's some that
Well actually I think stuff like this is really good
to talk to people about because we don't really think about performance too much. I mean, when
you're starting Python, you don't think about it too much. It's hopefully, you know, hopefully you
don't. There's pre, we don't want people to prematurely optimize, but there's some, just
some thing habits that maybe are decent to get into that avoid problems later on. And so that's
one of the reasons why i like um going through this uh oh nice um nice uh menu on the right side
also with all the hacks on the right anyway um the first one not not too surprising if you've
done through any like uh like you know leak code stuff or whatever is um leverage set for
membership testing so you if you've got a big list you can throw the list into a set and then you can
find out easily if something's in the list by putting it in a set.
And oddly, that speeds things up quite a bit, like drastically.
List lookup versus set lookup is super fast.
Super dictionaries, too.
Like if you're looking up by some kind of key, either one, it's ridiculous.
Yeah.
Like I said, some not too surprising.
Slots are great.
If you're going to use classes or data classes even, if it's not going to grow over time, you can define slots and stuff.
And then the lookup for each element within a data class is a lot faster with slots.
I want to jump around because there were some that I didn't really realize or I just didn't think about before.
And one of them is use math functions instead of operators.
and I guess I wouldn't
some of these are weird
so math.squart
for square root
is faster and more accurate
than raising a number to the power
of 0.5
using exponentation operator
I wouldn't do that anyway because that's
weird, it just looks weird
and it's bad, I don't know
bad code style I think
but there's a whole bunch of others
similarly the sine function exponent
log those are really fast operators in math so go ahead and utilize math and uh so that's a
good pointer pre-allocate memory with known sizes now this is some like an old trick that i think
that i didn't really think that it was a huge difference and it looks like one of the things
that's it's cool in this article it does the pre-allocated time versus or the uh before and
after times. So there's a bit of, you know, 0.01 second speed up. But so the trick is just to,
I guess, have an array with, if you're going to put, if you're going to fill an array anyway,
may as well just fill it with some zeros or something initially. And then it seems like
a waste of time to fill it with zeros because you're going to fill everything up, but it isn't
because it's the allocation that takes a little bit longer than the filling it with zeros.
um yeah and brian it's it's worth thinking through like how that goes a little bit because
if you just go append append append and this is something i don't do and it's inspiring me to
consider like well maybe i should but the rate doesn't know if you're going to put a million
items in there every time you add do like a rate out append or list out of pen it doesn't go guess
what we're going to add a million right it's like well what about 16 what about 32 of them oh now
we need more okay what about 64 of them you know it just it has to keep reallocating and copying as
you build this up so yeah and i don't remember how i mean it's a little smarter than that so i think
it like does like doubles it in size or takes a chunk or i can't remember what it does yeah it's
not allocating everyone right it's got an algorithm or heuristic but if you already know how how big
it's going to be you can just tell it to do it once which is cool but i don't really think about
that too much the um the a couple of the ones down below i really wanted to cover one this was uh
avoid exception handling and hot loops and i am guilty of this too because i try to have my
exception handling as close to the place where it can go wrong as possible just as it's a visual
thing and a code readability thing to have this tight um have the try right around that like a
The example has a zero division error,
has the try and accept right there.
However, that might slow down a little bit.
And it did, in this case,
was the try and accept on this one.
It's just not there.
I think the top one versus the bottom one.
Yeah, but there's no try and accept at the top.
That's the baseline.
The conditional check versus.
It's like checking for the condition
that would cause the exception to avoid the exception.
Oh, okay.
I guess I would just put the try and accept at the top
or around the larger one as a better comparison.
Anyway.
Yeah, I agree, but this is a big one.
But that's a big one.
Then we get into some really,
except there's exception handling,
using iter tools for combinatorial operations.
And this is huge.
If you're working with chunks of lists or chunks of stuff,
using iter tools and knowing what's in there,
it speeds up a huge amount.
So using iter tools versus loops for,
I forget what the example is here,
but the speed up is using product,
and the speed up is massive from, you know,
like what, 440 times bigger or something?
Four divided by, oh, five divided by 20.
That's four.
So it's four times speed up.
Math is hard.
BISECT is also a great thing to look at.
And yeah, anyway, just some cool,
wow, that's a massive speed up,
100 times speed up for using BISECT in the right places.
So finding out where,
places where you can use BISECT or inner tools
and just knowing that those are there to look them up.
Those are good speed ups.
anyway occasionally it's good to think about how fast is my code going you know i think we could
summarize up that article um by basically saying know the standard library
know your data structures mostly yeah use dicts right use editor tools etc uh the and the standard
library is still pretty big. I would probably limit that to the standard library that manipulates
data structures. Yeah, it kind of intersect with data structures. Yeah, I guess that's kind of what
I was getting at. And by the way, this was written by Dito Grigorov and posted by Yuvigena.
Oh, okay. Just want to make sure Dito gets a little credit for writing it.
Thanks for that clarification. Yeah, we'll fix that.
It's tricky. I think it's because the way the JetBrains CMS works.
Yeah.
Cool, cool.
Well, maybe we should talk to him about it.
Put him up on a little video call.
You know what I mean?
What do you think? Do a little WebRTC?
I kind of forgot about RTC.
I know, but you and I are sitting here.
People don't necessarily know how we're doing this.
It's magic.
We basically, you and I, we speak through magic.
But some of that magic is WebRTC because all of this is recording, streaming, etc.,
video and voice, multiple channels, multiple screens, and so on, over WebRTC in the browser,
which is ridiculous.
It's just ridiculous that this works.
So I want to talk about a library from Freddie Bolton, who is behind the Gradio project.
Gradio project, and I had him on Talk Python a couple years ago.
And this is called FastRTC.
So kind of like, hey, I'm a fan of integrating with FastAPI,
and I want to do WebRTC.
It's kind of ridiculous how simple some of these things are.
So it's pretty popular.
It's got 4,000 GitHub stars, 400 forks.
It's been around for a while.
Freddie pointed this out to me a decent while ago,
and I finally ain't getting around to talking about it.
But it's quite neat.
There's a little video you can watch about how to do it,
but it's got some examples for you.
Like if you want to do an echo audio,
which is kind of a sadistic example, you know what I mean?
Because that's usually the worst thing
about a video meeting is the echo.
But if you want to listen to yourself echo back
just to prove that it's going round and round,
Then how many lines is that?
I mean, there's a huge comma in there,
but if you take out the comma
and you format it a little bit wider,
it's probably five lines of code
to set up a server, connect to it,
and echo back.
Like, that's insane.
Insane.
And there's also ways to set up LLM voice chat
if you care about that.
You know, that's obviously the thing du jour.
I want to talk to my LLM, but you could do that pretty easily, pretty quickly here.
But also just stream your webcam back or object detection.
It's just a handful of lines of code.
It's insane.
But this stuff seems so complicated, doesn't it, Brian?
It's cool.
You're wrapping stuff up in a library.
Yeah.
So it comes with automatic voice detection, turn-taking built in, which is interesting.
It's got a UI to launch it in built-in Gradio UI,
if you want to do that.
I believe that's probably JavaScript.
Automatic Web RTC support.
So mount it onto a FastAPI app
and get a Web RTC endpoint for your own front end.
So you can kind of go Gradio or you can go this way.
It's got WebSocket support.
Listen to this.
Automatic telephone support.
use Fast Phone on the string and get your own temporary phone number.
Actually, that's pretty cool.
Yeah.
So, yeah, there's a lot of stuff going on here.
It says you can easily be mounted on your own FastAPI app
and customize it entirely,
extend it to fit within your production app,
I guess, assuming that's a FastAPI app,
although you could certainly squeeze it in using, like,
engine X routes to make it look like one app,
but it's not exactly the same backend and so on.
So there's examples for that.
Yeah.
So I thought it was pretty cool.
That's pretty neat.
I interviewed somebody in like three years ago, 2012,
about WebRTC.
They were doing a, wrote a book on it.
Nice.
And I thought, like, I don't think I'd ever use that.
But of course I use tools that use WebRTC.
all the time.
So like you said,
we're using it for.
We're using it right now.
And yeah,
it's one of those things
where it's like,
I don't think I'll ever build
one of those.
Like, oh,
and then you're like,
oh,
but what if I could do it
for this project
or something comes up
or, you know,
just knowing about it
as a.
I think it's,
yeah.
And right now,
like,
like you said,
with,
with things like
hooking up LLMs
to,
you know,
some,
some vibe coding.
Exactly.
I mean, no comment.
No comment.
Okay, so this is a listener suggestion, actually.
Comes to us as a request from Nicholas Karsner.
He said, hey, I'm using pip Deptree a lot lately,
and it's pretty cool if you covered that.
And I'm like, yeah, we covered it.
But I looked it up.
It was, I should have had the episode up.
But we covered it in episode 17.
um that was uh what um 2017 so yeah it was it was a minute ago that we've covered it so it's
totally fine to cover it again because there's been changes so um i did want to talk about both
pip pip dep tree but also i i have been i used pip dep tree for a long time but now usually i
use uv pip tree and so i just decided to write an article on it just to because i wanted to show
some code examples. One of the cool things I did not know that pip dep tree did, one of the things
that I would always do is I'd have a project install pip dep tree. And what it does is when
you run it, it looks at all the stuff you have installed and then shows them. It's kind of like
pip list, but it shows all the, it's like a tree structure and it shows them like in a tree
structure with what versions are installed and it's extra information.
Like if I'm using it from pyproject.toml, I have an example of the cards project, why
it chose the particular version that's installed.
So it's pretty handy, but I would always install it in the project and it would also tell me
that pip.dep.tree is installed.
But the trick is to install it somewhere globally,
like either using uvx pip dep tree or uv tool install pip dep tree.
And then you've got it just available to you always.
And then you can use Python auto.
And the Python auto flag will tell you,
it will look in the current environment that you're in.
So then you can have it in global.
And then, yeah, just look at whatever project you're in, which is cool.
I didn't know it could do the auto thing, too, so I'm glad I looked that up.
But what I'm using usually is uv PipTree because it's already installed with uv, and I have uv everywhere now.
By default, I wanted to go through a couple flags that I actually just learned about this when I was comparing this.
d if you do uv pip tree it'll show you a tree structure but it only shows you the versions that
are installed and it does do like for instance i'm showing cards and rich is showing up and it looks
like it's in a couple places um package tree already displayed rich oh yeah because i the cards project
depends on rich but it also depends on typer which is which also depends on rich so rich is duplicated
and there's a little note that says that there's a flag where you can turn it off but i kind of like
seeing the duplication it's um just to see who all is using something now um the to get a similar
look as pip dep tree you can add show version specifiers and then it shows you the rules
that it used to figure out what what to install but the new flag that i just learned about
which i'm super excited about is --outdated and this tells you um it tells you it it throws
the latest up it looks at all the things you got installed and tells you if there's newer ones so
you can go into your project and you can run uv pip tree outdated and it'll tell you what which
ones you should maybe update so it's it's pretty fun both of those so i like those tools that's
It's nice.
I do as well.
I've used pip dep tree for a long time.
It's nice to just go, why is this here?
Why is click installed?
I don't remember installing click.
It's fine, but I just don't remember installing it.
But oh, it's icy because I installed typer,
and I forgot that typer is a wraparound click.
Whatever.
Yeah, and one of the things, for instance,
I'm thinking about update a hypothetical scenario.
got rich or i've got on my cards application um i'm using rich but maybe maybe i maybe i'll try to
like you know tighten the dependencies by not using rich but if i'm using typer it's going to come in
anyway so it's kind of i like to see the duplication because i'm not going to save anything if i don't
depend on rich directly it's already there because of typer so um yes exactly you're like can i just
just get rid of this thing you're like nope no not easily not directly anyway um yeah but
if i got rid of typer also somehow and then i could get rid of rich and maybe i'll like redo
the tiny db too yeah anyway um tighten it up all right those are uh that's my items to talk about
Oh, I do have links to both PipTripTree and uv treeRich.
UV, Pip, Tree, Rich.
Also, those are all different words.
Nice.
All right.
Well, just keep going.
You're the only one with extras today.
Okay.
I got a couple extras.
I've got one of the benefits of working at the office, like the back to office thing,
is I was walking by one of my colleagues, and he's got a bunch of colors up on his screen.
And I'm like, what are those colors?
And I use VS Code at work.
And I've often got different projects up.
The same thing.
He's using, and I started using this just like last week,
a thing called Peacock.
And what it does is it shows different colors
around the outside of your terminal
and it only, it's, or outside of your VS Code window.
but the colors are picked and stored in the project or like the workspace.
Yeah, the workspace.
So that if you've got different projects open, they all have different colors.
So when you're like, I want to go back to that window,
you just have to remember which color goes to which project.
And that's kind of up to you.
Ooh, Brian, I might have to install this.
One of the cool things is I'm like, well, I chose green,
And it's a little too bright for me.
I kind of wanted a darker green.
It has built-in buttons to just go a little darker,
a little darker, a little darker, or a little lighter.
You can do custom, like pick your own color.
But you can also say, this is close,
but I'd like it a little darker.
And it just is pretty cool.
So I'm loving that.
Yeah.
And it's not incredibly popular,
but it looks like it's from John Papa,
who's been around in the tech space for a long time.
So it seems trustworthy.
Where do you see the popularity?
Is it in here?
It's the downloads.
Oh, I take it back.
I thought it was, it may have more than I initially said.
It has three point, basically 4 million downloads.
Okay.
So actually there's a few downloads.
People like this idea.
Oh, I was looking at the open VSX marketplace,
which is like a similar, but not the same.
The other update.
So one of the things I mentioned last week is that I'm writing a book again.
And I just updated this last night, I think last night.
There's another chapter written.
So I've got to clean this up.
Both versions are here.
But I did Essential Components for Successful Software Projects.
I got that one up.
And I completely rewrote the introduction.
And I should stop doing that.
An editor a long time ago told me, do a quick introduction
and then leave it alone until you finish the book.
and then you can update it to be what the book actually is.
And so I got to do that.
A hundred percent.
I think that's a great idea about the introduction.
I do it with my courses sometimes.
I'll record the whole course, and then I'll record the introduction
because I'm like, I want to be able to say,
and we're going to cover this in this section,
and then actually have that match.
Yeah, but my brain won't let me go on
if I don't write an introduction to start with.
It's like, but I haven't done an introduction, man.
I know.
The essential components chapter,
this was tough, man, because there's like,
I needed it to be tight,
or I wanted it to be a tight chapter,
but I rewrote it like five times
because I had so many stories and stuff
I wanted to throw in, and I decided
to take the stories out and leave those stories
as blog posts later after I get the book done.
But, oh,
I guess the third extra, I don't have anything
to show for this, but when I'm
writing and I've got all this great stuff
that I want to save, but I know
it shouldn't be in this chapter or it shouldn't be
in this blog post, I've decided for my editor,
I've got a file called Cut Bucket, like C-U-T Bucket.
And I just put a divider line, put another title,
and paste the stuff I want to save there.
And then I don't.
And then my brain, it's a brain trick, is,
oh, I haven't thrown it away.
It's there.
You don't have to remember it and move on with writing.
Yeah, awesome.
What's your editor that you're writing in?
Are you doing Markdown?
What is this story?
Oh, yeah.
It's marked down in VS Code.
And so the pytest book had tons of code snippets and everything.
I think this is going to be a code snippet-free book.
The goal is to do an audio version later.
And I might have some code snippets, but probably not.
Actually, it's one of the things of reading the Tester of Development book,
the OG one from Kent Beck.
it's all in Java
I think
you're lucky it's not Smalltalk
well right
maybe it is Smalltalk
I don't remember
I think it's Java as well
I just sort of scammed by the
code snippets because I'm like I don't care
I'm just like here for the concepts
so I'm trying to keep this book
the concepts and not the code
because the code is different
for everybody man
absolutely love it
that's all I got
alright well
let's sell a joke then and
close it out
I've done a few AI ones
it's not an AI joke folks
so if you're tired of the AI jokes
well then don't worry
this isn't what
this one is
a joke about the future of Python
and people being
stuck in their ways
or having assumptions about Python not being as fast as it could be,
or having limitations that it doesn't have anymore, theoretically,
or semi-theoretically, whatever.
And it's a woman in a walker,
probably 70 or so,
with the granddaughter helping her back to sit down or something.
So I think I named, what did I name the project, the joke here?
I think I called it, okay, Grandma, is the joke.
So, honey, do you know that the gil prevents multiple Python threads from executing parallelly?
Sure, Grandma, let's get you back to bed.
Bit of a testament to Python 3.14 and Python T and Free Thread Python and all that.
That's funny.
I can just fast forward.
I can imagine me 10 years from now telling the kids,
when I was a kid, we had a GIL.
We had one thread at a time.
You little whippersnappers don't know how good you got it.
My Python used to just run interpreted, and it was so slow.
We would debate whether it was fast enough.
Anyway, that's what I got for a joke for us.
I like it.
yeah all right it worked for me i liked it so nice all right well uh thanks everybody for joining
and listening and we love you all and um we'll talk to you next week yeah thanks brian thanks everyone